README.md, before:

# Handy

[![Discord](https://img.shields.io/badge/Discord-%235865F2.svg?style=for-the-badge&logo=discord&logoColor=white)](https://discord.com/invite/WVBeWsNXK4)

**A free, open source, and extensible speech-to-text application that works completely offline.**

Handy is a cross-platform desktop application built with Tauri (Rust + React/TypeScript) that provides simple, privacy-focused speech transcription. Press a shortcut, speak, and have your words appear in any text field—all without sending your voice to the cloud.

## Why Handy?

Handy was created to fill the gap for a truly open source, extensible speech-to-text tool. As stated on [handy.computer](https://handy.computer):

- **Free**: Accessibility tooling belongs in everyone's hands, not behind a paywall
- **Open Source**: Together we can build further. Extend Handy for yourself and contribute to something bigger
- **Private**: Your voice stays on your computer. Get transcriptions without sending audio to the cloud
- **Simple**: One tool, one job. Transcribe what you say and put it into a text box

Handy isn't trying to be the best speech-to-text app—it's trying to be the most forkable one.

## How It Works

1. **Press** a configurable keyboard shortcut to start/stop recording (or use push-to-talk mode)
2. **Speak** your words while the shortcut is active
3. **Release** and Handy processes your speech using Whisper
4. **Get** your transcribed text pasted directly into whatever app you're using

The process is entirely local:

- Silence is filtered using VAD (Voice Activity Detection) with Silero
- Transcription uses your choice of models:
  - **Whisper models** (Small/Medium/Turbo/Large) with GPU acceleration when available
  - **Parakeet V3** - CPU-optimized model with excellent performance and automatic language detection
  - **Voxtral 4B** - Mistral AI's realtime speech-to-text model with GPU acceleration (Vulkan/Metal)
- Works on Windows, macOS, and Linux

## Quick Start

### Installation

1. Download the latest release from the [releases page](https://github.com/cjpais/Handy/releases) or the [website](https://handy.computer)
   - **macOS**: Also available via [Homebrew cask](https://formulae.brew.sh/cask/handy): `brew install --cask handy`
2. Install the application
3. Launch Handy and grant necessary system permissions (microphone, accessibility)
4. Configure your preferred keyboard shortcuts in Settings
5. Start transcribing!

### Development Setup

For detailed build instructions including platform-specific requirements, see [BUILD.md](BUILD.md).

## Architecture

Handy is built as a Tauri application combining:

- **Frontend**: React + TypeScript with Tailwind CSS for the settings UI
- **Backend**: Rust for system integration, audio processing, and ML inference
- **Core Libraries**:
  - `whisper-rs`: Local speech recognition with Whisper models
  - `transcription-rs`: CPU-optimized speech recognition with Parakeet models
  - `voxtral` (embedded C): Mistral AI Voxtral 4B inference with GPU acceleration
  - `cpal`: Cross-platform audio I/O
  - `vad-rs`: Voice Activity Detection
  - `rdev`: Global keyboard shortcuts and system events
  - `rubato`: Audio resampling

### Debug Mode

Handy includes an advanced debug mode for development and troubleshooting. Access it by pressing:

- **macOS**: `Cmd+Shift+D`
- **Windows/Linux**: `Ctrl+Shift+D`

## Known Issues & Current Limitations

This project is actively being developed and has some [known issues](https://github.com/cjpais/Handy/issues). We believe in transparency about the current state:

### Major Issues (Help Wanted)

**Whisper Model Crashes:**

- Whisper models crash on certain system configurations (Windows and Linux)
- Does not affect all systems - issue is configuration-dependent
  - If you experience crashes and are a developer, please help to fix and provide debug logs!

**Wayland Support (Linux):**

- Limited support for Wayland display server
- Requires [`wtype`](https://github.com/atx/wtype) or [`dotool`](https://sr.ht/~geb/dotool/) for text input to work correctly (see [Linux Notes](#linux-notes) below for installation)

### Linux Notes

**Text Input Tools:**

For reliable text input on Linux, install the appropriate tool for your display server:

| Display Server | Recommended Tool | Install Command                                    |
| -------------- | ---------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| X11            | `xdotool`        | `sudo apt install xdotool`                         |
| Wayland        | `wtype`          | `sudo apt install wtype`                           |
| Both           | `dotool`         | `sudo apt install dotool` (requires `input` group) |

- **X11**: Install `xdotool` for both direct typing and clipboard paste shortcuts
- **Wayland**: Install `wtype` (preferred) or `dotool` for text input to work correctly
- **dotool setup**: Requires adding your user to the `input` group: `sudo usermod -aG input $USER` (then log out and back in)

Without these tools, Handy falls back to enigo which may have limited compatibility, especially on Wayland.

**Other Notes:**

- **Runtime library dependency (`libgtk-layer-shell.so.0`)**:
  - Handy links `gtk-layer-shell` on Linux. If startup fails with `error while loading shared libraries: libgtk-layer-shell.so.0`, install the runtime package for your distro:

    | Distro        | Package to install    | Example command                        |
    | ------------- | --------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
    | Ubuntu/Debian | `libgtk-layer-shell0` | `sudo apt install libgtk-layer-shell0` |
    | Fedora/RHEL   | `gtk-layer-shell`     | `sudo dnf install gtk-layer-shell`     |
    | Arch Linux    | `gtk-layer-shell`     | `sudo pacman -S gtk-layer-shell`       |

  - For building from source on Ubuntu/Debian, you may also need `libgtk-layer-shell-dev`.

- The recording overlay is disabled by default on Linux (`Overlay Position: None`) because certain compositors treat it as the active window. When the overlay is visible it can steal focus, which prevents Handy from pasting back into the application that triggered transcription. If you enable the overlay anyway, be aware that clipboard-based pasting might fail or end up in the wrong window.
- If you are having trouble with the app, running with the environment variable `WEBKIT_DISABLE_DMABUF_RENDERER=1` may help
- You can manage global shortcuts outside of Handy and still control the app via signals. Sending `SIGUSR2` to the Handy process toggles recording on/off, which lets Wayland window managers or other hotkey daemons keep ownership of keybindings. Example (Sway):

  ```ini
  bindsym $mod+o exec pkill -USR2 -n handy
  ```

  `pkill` here simply delivers the signal—it does not terminate the process.

### Platform Support

- **macOS (both Intel and Apple Silicon)**
- **x64 Windows**
- **x64 Linux**

### System Requirements/Recommendations

The following are recommendations for running Handy on your own machine. If you don't meet the system requirements, the performance of the application may be degraded. We are working on improving the performance across all kinds of computers and hardware.

**For Whisper Models:**

- **macOS**: M series Mac, Intel Mac
- **Windows**: Intel, AMD, or NVIDIA GPU
- **Linux**: Intel, AMD, or NVIDIA GPU
  - Ubuntu 22.04, 24.04

**For Parakeet V3 Model:**

- **CPU-only operation** - runs on a wide variety of hardware
- **Minimum**: Intel Skylake (6th gen) or equivalent AMD processors
- **Performance**: ~5x real-time speed on mid-range hardware (tested on i5)
- **Automatic language detection** - no manual language selection required

**For Voxtral 4B Model:**

- **Requires a GPU** — a discrete GPU with ≥12 GB VRAM is strongly recommended
  - **Linux**: Vulkan-capable GPU (NVIDIA, AMD, Intel Arc)
  - **macOS**: Apple Silicon (M1 or later, Metal acceleration)
- **~8.9 GB download** — model weights are bf16 safetensors from [HuggingFace](https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Voxtral-Mini-4B-Realtime-2602)
- **~10 GB RAM/VRAM** in use at runtime (weights + KV caches + activations)
- Integrated GPUs (e.g. AMD Radeon 760M, Intel Iris) technically work but will be significantly slower than smaller models like Parakeet due to the 4B parameter count and autoregressive decoder
- Supports 99+ languages via the Tekken tokenizer

## Roadmap & Active Development

We're actively working on several features and improvements. Contributions and feedback are welcome!

### In Progress

**Debug Logging:**

- Adding debug logging to a file to help diagnose issues

**macOS Keyboard Improvements:**

- Support for Globe key as transcription trigger
- A rewrite of global shortcut handling for MacOS, and potentially other OS's too.

**Opt-in Analytics:**

- Collect anonymous usage data to help improve Handy
- Privacy-first approach with clear opt-in

**Settings Refactoring:**

- Cleanup and refactor settings system which is becoming bloated and messy
- Implement better abstractions for settings management

**Tauri Commands Cleanup:**

- Abstract and organize Tauri command patterns
- Investigate tauri-specta for improved type safety and organization

## Troubleshooting

### Manual Model Installation (For Proxy Users or Network Restrictions)

If you're behind a proxy, firewall, or in a restricted network environment where Handy cannot download models automatically, you can manually download and install them. The URLs are publicly accessible from any browser.

#### Step 1: Find Your App Data Directory

1. Open Handy settings
2. Navigate to the **About** section
3. Copy the "App Data Directory" path shown there, or use the shortcuts:
   - **macOS**: `Cmd+Shift+D` to open debug menu
   - **Windows/Linux**: `Ctrl+Shift+D` to open debug menu

The typical paths are:

- **macOS**: `~/Library/Application Support/com.pais.handy/`
- **Windows**: `C:\Users\{username}\AppData\Roaming\com.pais.handy\`
- **Linux**: `~/.config/com.pais.handy/`

#### Step 2: Create Models Directory

Inside your app data directory, create a `models` folder if it doesn't already exist:

```bash
# macOS/Linux
mkdir -p ~/Library/Application\ Support/com.pais.handy/models

# Windows (PowerShell)
New-Item -ItemType Directory -Force -Path "$env:APPDATA\com.pais.handy\models"
```

#### Step 3: Download Model Files

Download the models you want from below

**Whisper Models (single .bin files):**

- Small (487 MB): `https://blob.handy.computer/ggml-small.bin`
- Medium (492 MB): `https://blob.handy.computer/whisper-medium-q4_1.bin`
- Turbo (1600 MB): `https://blob.handy.computer/ggml-large-v3-turbo.bin`
- Large (1100 MB): `https://blob.handy.computer/ggml-large-v3-q5_0.bin`

**Parakeet Models (compressed archives):**

- V2 (473 MB): `https://blob.handy.computer/parakeet-v2-int8.tar.gz`
- V3 (478 MB): `https://blob.handy.computer/parakeet-v3-int8.tar.gz`

**Voxtral 4B (3 files, ~8.9 GB total):**

All files from: `https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Voxtral-Mini-4B-Realtime-2602/resolve/main/`

- `consolidated.safetensors` (~8.9 GB)
- `tekken.json` (~14 MB)
- `params.json` (~1 KB)

#### Step 4: Install Models

**For Whisper Models (.bin files):**

Simply place the `.bin` file directly into the `models` directory:

```
{app_data_dir}/models/
├── ggml-small.bin
├── whisper-medium-q4_1.bin
├── ggml-large-v3-turbo.bin
└── ggml-large-v3-q5_0.bin
```

**For Parakeet Models (.tar.gz archives):**

1. Extract the `.tar.gz` file
2. Place the **extracted directory** into the `models` folder
3. The directory must be named exactly as follows:
   - **Parakeet V2**: `parakeet-tdt-0.6b-v2-int8`
   - **Parakeet V3**: `parakeet-tdt-0.6b-v3-int8`

Final structure should look like:

```
{app_data_dir}/models/
├── parakeet-tdt-0.6b-v2-int8/     (directory with model files inside)
│   ├── (model files)
│   └── (config files)
└── parakeet-tdt-0.6b-v3-int8/     (directory with model files inside)
    ├── (model files)
    └── (config files)
```

**For Voxtral 4B (3 individual files):**

1. Create a `voxtral-model` directory inside `models`
2. Place all 3 files directly into that directory

```
{app_data_dir}/models/
└── voxtral-model/
    ├── consolidated.safetensors
    ├── tekken.json
    └── params.json
```

**Important Notes:**

- For Parakeet models, the extracted directory name **must** match exactly as shown above
- For Voxtral, the directory **must** be named `voxtral-model`
- Do not rename the `.bin` files for Whisper models—use the exact filenames from the download URLs
- After placing the files, restart Handy to detect the new models

#### Step 5: Verify Installation

1. Restart Handy
2. Open Settings → Models
3. Your manually installed models should now appear as "Downloaded"
4. Select the model you want to use and test transcription

### Custom Whisper Models

Handy can auto-discover custom Whisper GGML models placed in the `models` directory. This is useful for users who want to use fine-tuned or community models not included in the default model list.

**How to use:**

1. Obtain a Whisper model in GGML `.bin` format (e.g., from [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/models?search=whisper%20ggml))
2. Place the `.bin` file in your `models` directory (see paths above)
3. Restart Handy to discover the new model
4. The model will appear in the "Custom Models" section of the Models settings page

**Important:**

- Community models are user-provided and may not receive troubleshooting assistance
- The model must be a valid Whisper GGML format (`.bin` file)
- Model name is derived from the filename (e.g., `my-custom-model.bin` → "My Custom Model")

### How to Contribute

1. **Check existing issues** at [github.com/cjpais/Handy/issues](https://github.com/cjpais/Handy/issues)
2. **Fork the repository** and create a feature branch
3. **Test thoroughly** on your target platform
4. **Submit a pull request** with clear description of changes
5. **Join the discussion** - reach out at [contact@handy.computer](mailto:contact@handy.computer)

The goal is to create both a useful tool and a foundation for others to build upon—a well-patterned, simple codebase that serves the community.

## Sponsors

<div align="center">
  We're grateful for the support of our sponsors who help make Handy possible:
  <br><br>
  <a href="https://wordcab.com">
    <img src="sponsor-images/wordcab.png" alt="Wordcab" width="120" height="120">
  </a>
  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
  <a href="https://github.com/epicenter-so/epicenter">
    <img src="sponsor-images/epicenter.png" alt="Epicenter" width="120" height="120">
  </a>
</div>

## Related Projects

- **[Handy CLI](https://github.com/cjpais/handy-cli)** - The original Python command-line version
- **[handy.computer](https://handy.computer)** - Project website with demos and documentation

## Changes from Upstream

This fork adds **Voxtral 4B** ([Mistral AI Voxtral Realtime 4B](https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Voxtral-Mini-4B-Realtime-2602)) as a transcription engine. Voxtral is a 4-billion parameter encoder-decoder speech-to-text model that supports 99+ languages with high accuracy.

The voxtral code is based on [Voxtral.c](https://github.com/antirez/voxtral.c) and has been ported to Linux/Vulkan with the help of [Pi](https://github.com/badlogic/pi-mono/tree/main/packages/coding-agent).

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- **Whisper** by OpenAI for the speech recognition model
- **whisper.cpp and ggml** for amazing cross-platform whisper inference/acceleration
- **Mistral AI** for the Voxtral Realtime 4B speech-to-text model
- **Silero** for great lightweight VAD
- **Tauri** team for the excellent Rust-based app framework
- **Community contributors** helping make Handy better

---

_"Your search for the right speech-to-text tool can end here—not because Handy is perfect, but because you can make it perfect for you."_

Commit message:

docs: move fork changes to top of README
Restructure README so visitors immediately see what this fork adds:
- Voxtral 4B support
- Linux/Wayland global shortcut fix
- Paste tool fallback chain fix
- Improved debug logging

Removed the old 'Changes from Upstream' section that was buried
near the bottom of the file.

README.md, after:

# Handy (Fork)

> **This is a fork of [cjpais/Handy](https://github.com/cjpais/Handy)** with additional features and Linux/Wayland fixes.

[![Discord](https://img.shields.io/badge/Discord-%235865F2.svg?style=for-the-badge&logo=discord&logoColor=white)](https://discord.com/invite/WVBeWsNXK4)

**A free, open source, and extensible speech-to-text application that works completely offline.**

Handy is a cross-platform desktop application built with Tauri (Rust + React/TypeScript) that provides simple, privacy-focused speech transcription. Press a shortcut, speak, and have your words appear in any text field—all without sending your voice to the cloud.

## Fork Changes

This fork includes the following changes on top of upstream [cjpais/Handy](https://github.com/cjpais/Handy):

### Voxtral 4B Support

Adds **Voxtral 4B** ([Mistral AI Voxtral Realtime 4B](https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Voxtral-Mini-4B-Realtime-2602)) as a transcription engine. Voxtral is a 4-billion parameter encoder-decoder speech-to-text model that supports 99+ languages with high accuracy.

The voxtral code is based on [Voxtral.c](https://github.com/antirez/voxtral.c) and has been ported to Linux/Vulkan with the help of [Pi](https://github.com/badlogic/pi-mono/tree/main/packages/coding-agent).

### Linux/Wayland Fixes

- **Global shortcuts now work on Wayland**: Tauri's global-shortcut plugin uses X11 `XGrabKey` which silently fails on Wayland. This fork automatically uses the `HandyKeys` backend (via `rdev`/evdev) on Wayland, which works regardless of display server.
- **Paste tool fallback chain**: When a text input tool (e.g. `wtype`) is installed but fails at runtime (common on GNOME Wayland), the app now gracefully falls through to the next available tool (`dotool` → `ydotool` → `enigo`) instead of failing immediately.
- **Improved debug logging**: Added logging for shortcut press/release events and audio recording levels to help diagnose issues.

---

## Why Handy?

Handy was created to fill the gap for a truly open source, extensible speech-to-text tool. As stated on [handy.computer](https://handy.computer):

- **Free**: Accessibility tooling belongs in everyone's hands, not behind a paywall
- **Open Source**: Together we can build further. Extend Handy for yourself and contribute to something bigger
- **Private**: Your voice stays on your computer. Get transcriptions without sending audio to the cloud
- **Simple**: One tool, one job. Transcribe what you say and put it into a text box

Handy isn't trying to be the best speech-to-text app—it's trying to be the most forkable one.

## How It Works

1. **Press** a configurable keyboard shortcut to start/stop recording (or use push-to-talk mode)
2. **Speak** your words while the shortcut is active
3. **Release** and Handy processes your speech using Whisper
4. **Get** your transcribed text pasted directly into whatever app you're using

The process is entirely local:

- Silence is filtered using VAD (Voice Activity Detection) with Silero
- Transcription uses your choice of models:
  - **Whisper models** (Small/Medium/Turbo/Large) with GPU acceleration when available
  - **Parakeet V3** - CPU-optimized model with excellent performance and automatic language detection
  - **Voxtral 4B** - Mistral AI's realtime speech-to-text model with GPU acceleration (Vulkan/Metal)
- Works on Windows, macOS, and Linux

## Quick Start

### Installation

1. Download the latest release from the [releases page](https://github.com/cjpais/Handy/releases) or the [website](https://handy.computer)
   - **macOS**: Also available via [Homebrew cask](https://formulae.brew.sh/cask/handy): `brew install --cask handy`
2. Install the application
3. Launch Handy and grant necessary system permissions (microphone, accessibility)
4. Configure your preferred keyboard shortcuts in Settings
5. Start transcribing!

### Development Setup

For detailed build instructions including platform-specific requirements, see [BUILD.md](BUILD.md).

## Architecture

Handy is built as a Tauri application combining:

- **Frontend**: React + TypeScript with Tailwind CSS for the settings UI
- **Backend**: Rust for system integration, audio processing, and ML inference
- **Core Libraries**:
  - `whisper-rs`: Local speech recognition with Whisper models
  - `transcription-rs`: CPU-optimized speech recognition with Parakeet models
  - `voxtral` (embedded C): Mistral AI Voxtral 4B inference with GPU acceleration
  - `cpal`: Cross-platform audio I/O
  - `vad-rs`: Voice Activity Detection
  - `rdev`: Global keyboard shortcuts and system events
  - `rubato`: Audio resampling

### Debug Mode

Handy includes an advanced debug mode for development and troubleshooting. Access it by pressing:

- **macOS**: `Cmd+Shift+D`
- **Windows/Linux**: `Ctrl+Shift+D`

## Known Issues & Current Limitations

This project is actively being developed and has some [known issues](https://github.com/cjpais/Handy/issues). We believe in transparency about the current state:

### Major Issues (Help Wanted)

**Whisper Model Crashes:**

- Whisper models crash on certain system configurations (Windows and Linux)
- Does not affect all systems - issue is configuration-dependent
  - If you experience crashes and are a developer, please help to fix and provide debug logs!

**Wayland Support (Linux):**

- Limited support for Wayland display server
- Requires [`wtype`](https://github.com/atx/wtype) or [`dotool`](https://sr.ht/~geb/dotool/) for text input to work correctly (see [Linux Notes](#linux-notes) below for installation)

### Linux Notes

**Text Input Tools:**

For reliable text input on Linux, install the appropriate tool for your display server:

| Display Server | Recommended Tool | Install Command                                    |
| -------------- | ---------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| X11            | `xdotool`        | `sudo apt install xdotool`                         |
| Wayland        | `wtype`          | `sudo apt install wtype`                           |
| Both           | `dotool`         | `sudo apt install dotool` (requires `input` group) |

- **X11**: Install `xdotool` for both direct typing and clipboard paste shortcuts
- **Wayland**: Install `wtype` (preferred) or `dotool` for text input to work correctly
- **dotool setup**: Requires adding your user to the `input` group: `sudo usermod -aG input $USER` (then log out and back in)

Without these tools, Handy falls back to enigo which may have limited compatibility, especially on Wayland.

**Other Notes:**

- **Runtime library dependency (`libgtk-layer-shell.so.0`)**:
  - Handy links `gtk-layer-shell` on Linux. If startup fails with `error while loading shared libraries: libgtk-layer-shell.so.0`, install the runtime package for your distro:

    | Distro        | Package to install    | Example command                        |
    | ------------- | --------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
    | Ubuntu/Debian | `libgtk-layer-shell0` | `sudo apt install libgtk-layer-shell0` |
    | Fedora/RHEL   | `gtk-layer-shell`     | `sudo dnf install gtk-layer-shell`     |
    | Arch Linux    | `gtk-layer-shell`     | `sudo pacman -S gtk-layer-shell`       |

  - For building from source on Ubuntu/Debian, you may also need `libgtk-layer-shell-dev`.

- The recording overlay is disabled by default on Linux (`Overlay Position: None`) because certain compositors treat it as the active window. When the overlay is visible it can steal focus, which prevents Handy from pasting back into the application that triggered transcription. If you enable the overlay anyway, be aware that clipboard-based pasting might fail or end up in the wrong window.
- If you are having trouble with the app, running with the environment variable `WEBKIT_DISABLE_DMABUF_RENDERER=1` may help
- You can manage global shortcuts outside of Handy and still control the app via signals. Sending `SIGUSR2` to the Handy process toggles recording on/off, which lets Wayland window managers or other hotkey daemons keep ownership of keybindings. Example (Sway):

  ```ini
  bindsym $mod+o exec pkill -USR2 -n handy
  ```

  `pkill` here simply delivers the signal—it does not terminate the process.

### Platform Support

- **macOS (both Intel and Apple Silicon)**
- **x64 Windows**
- **x64 Linux**

### System Requirements/Recommendations

The following are recommendations for running Handy on your own machine. If you don't meet the system requirements, the performance of the application may be degraded. We are working on improving the performance across all kinds of computers and hardware.

**For Whisper Models:**

- **macOS**: M series Mac, Intel Mac
- **Windows**: Intel, AMD, or NVIDIA GPU
- **Linux**: Intel, AMD, or NVIDIA GPU
  - Ubuntu 22.04, 24.04

**For Parakeet V3 Model:**

- **CPU-only operation** - runs on a wide variety of hardware
- **Minimum**: Intel Skylake (6th gen) or equivalent AMD processors
- **Performance**: ~5x real-time speed on mid-range hardware (tested on i5)
- **Automatic language detection** - no manual language selection required

**For Voxtral 4B Model:**

- **Requires a GPU** — a discrete GPU with ≥12 GB VRAM is strongly recommended
  - **Linux**: Vulkan-capable GPU (NVIDIA, AMD, Intel Arc)
  - **macOS**: Apple Silicon (M1 or later, Metal acceleration)
- **~8.9 GB download** — model weights are bf16 safetensors from [HuggingFace](https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Voxtral-Mini-4B-Realtime-2602)
- **~10 GB RAM/VRAM** in use at runtime (weights + KV caches + activations)
- Integrated GPUs (e.g. AMD Radeon 760M, Intel Iris) technically work but will be significantly slower than smaller models like Parakeet due to the 4B parameter count and autoregressive decoder
- Supports 99+ languages via the Tekken tokenizer

## Roadmap & Active Development

We're actively working on several features and improvements. Contributions and feedback are welcome!

### In Progress

**Debug Logging:**

- Adding debug logging to a file to help diagnose issues

**macOS Keyboard Improvements:**

- Support for Globe key as transcription trigger
- A rewrite of global shortcut handling for MacOS, and potentially other OS's too.

**Opt-in Analytics:**

- Collect anonymous usage data to help improve Handy
- Privacy-first approach with clear opt-in

**Settings Refactoring:**

- Cleanup and refactor settings system which is becoming bloated and messy
- Implement better abstractions for settings management

**Tauri Commands Cleanup:**

- Abstract and organize Tauri command patterns
- Investigate tauri-specta for improved type safety and organization

## Troubleshooting

### Manual Model Installation (For Proxy Users or Network Restrictions)

If you're behind a proxy, firewall, or in a restricted network environment where Handy cannot download models automatically, you can manually download and install them. The URLs are publicly accessible from any browser.

#### Step 1: Find Your App Data Directory

1. Open Handy settings
2. Navigate to the **About** section
3. Copy the "App Data Directory" path shown there, or use the shortcuts:
   - **macOS**: `Cmd+Shift+D` to open debug menu
   - **Windows/Linux**: `Ctrl+Shift+D` to open debug menu

The typical paths are:

- **macOS**: `~/Library/Application Support/com.pais.handy/`
- **Windows**: `C:\Users\{username}\AppData\Roaming\com.pais.handy\`
- **Linux**: `~/.config/com.pais.handy/`

#### Step 2: Create Models Directory

Inside your app data directory, create a `models` folder if it doesn't already exist:

```bash
# macOS/Linux
mkdir -p ~/Library/Application\ Support/com.pais.handy/models

# Windows (PowerShell)
New-Item -ItemType Directory -Force -Path "$env:APPDATA\com.pais.handy\models"
```

#### Step 3: Download Model Files

Download the models you want from below

**Whisper Models (single .bin files):**

- Small (487 MB): `https://blob.handy.computer/ggml-small.bin`
- Medium (492 MB): `https://blob.handy.computer/whisper-medium-q4_1.bin`
- Turbo (1600 MB): `https://blob.handy.computer/ggml-large-v3-turbo.bin`
- Large (1100 MB): `https://blob.handy.computer/ggml-large-v3-q5_0.bin`

**Parakeet Models (compressed archives):**

- V2 (473 MB): `https://blob.handy.computer/parakeet-v2-int8.tar.gz`
- V3 (478 MB): `https://blob.handy.computer/parakeet-v3-int8.tar.gz`

**Voxtral 4B (3 files, ~8.9 GB total):**

All files from: `https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Voxtral-Mini-4B-Realtime-2602/resolve/main/`

- `consolidated.safetensors` (~8.9 GB)
- `tekken.json` (~14 MB)
- `params.json` (~1 KB)

#### Step 4: Install Models

**For Whisper Models (.bin files):**

Simply place the `.bin` file directly into the `models` directory:

```
{app_data_dir}/models/
├── ggml-small.bin
├── whisper-medium-q4_1.bin
├── ggml-large-v3-turbo.bin
└── ggml-large-v3-q5_0.bin
```

**For Parakeet Models (.tar.gz archives):**

1. Extract the `.tar.gz` file
2. Place the **extracted directory** into the `models` folder
3. The directory must be named exactly as follows:
   - **Parakeet V2**: `parakeet-tdt-0.6b-v2-int8`
   - **Parakeet V3**: `parakeet-tdt-0.6b-v3-int8`

Final structure should look like:

```
{app_data_dir}/models/
├── parakeet-tdt-0.6b-v2-int8/     (directory with model files inside)
│   ├── (model files)
│   └── (config files)
└── parakeet-tdt-0.6b-v3-int8/     (directory with model files inside)
    ├── (model files)
    └── (config files)
```

**For Voxtral 4B (3 individual files):**

1. Create a `voxtral-model` directory inside `models`
2. Place all 3 files directly into that directory

```
{app_data_dir}/models/
└── voxtral-model/
    ├── consolidated.safetensors
    ├── tekken.json
    └── params.json
```

**Important Notes:**

- For Parakeet models, the extracted directory name **must** match exactly as shown above
- For Voxtral, the directory **must** be named `voxtral-model`
- Do not rename the `.bin` files for Whisper models—use the exact filenames from the download URLs
- After placing the files, restart Handy to detect the new models

#### Step 5: Verify Installation

1. Restart Handy
2. Open Settings → Models
3. Your manually installed models should now appear as "Downloaded"
4. Select the model you want to use and test transcription

### Custom Whisper Models

Handy can auto-discover custom Whisper GGML models placed in the `models` directory. This is useful for users who want to use fine-tuned or community models not included in the default model list.

**How to use:**

1. Obtain a Whisper model in GGML `.bin` format (e.g., from [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/models?search=whisper%20ggml))
2. Place the `.bin` file in your `models` directory (see paths above)
3. Restart Handy to discover the new model
4. The model will appear in the "Custom Models" section of the Models settings page

**Important:**

- Community models are user-provided and may not receive troubleshooting assistance
- The model must be a valid Whisper GGML format (`.bin` file)
- Model name is derived from the filename (e.g., `my-custom-model.bin` → "My Custom Model")

### How to Contribute

1. **Check existing issues** at [github.com/cjpais/Handy/issues](https://github.com/cjpais/Handy/issues)
2. **Fork the repository** and create a feature branch
3. **Test thoroughly** on your target platform
4. **Submit a pull request** with clear description of changes
5. **Join the discussion** - reach out at [contact@handy.computer](mailto:contact@handy.computer)

The goal is to create both a useful tool and a foundation for others to build upon—a well-patterned, simple codebase that serves the community.

## Sponsors

<div align="center">
  We're grateful for the support of our sponsors who help make Handy possible:
  <br><br>
  <a href="https://wordcab.com">
    <img src="sponsor-images/wordcab.png" alt="Wordcab" width="120" height="120">
  </a>
  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
  <a href="https://github.com/epicenter-so/epicenter">
    <img src="sponsor-images/epicenter.png" alt="Epicenter" width="120" height="120">
  </a>
</div>

## Related Projects

- **[Handy CLI](https://github.com/cjpais/handy-cli)** - The original Python command-line version
- **[handy.computer](https://handy.computer)** - Project website with demos and documentation

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- **Whisper** by OpenAI for the speech recognition model
- **whisper.cpp and ggml** for amazing cross-platform whisper inference/acceleration
- **Mistral AI** for the Voxtral Realtime 4B speech-to-text model
- **Silero** for great lightweight VAD
- **Tauri** team for the excellent Rust-based app framework
- **Community contributors** helping make Handy better

---

_"Your search for the right speech-to-text tool can end here—not because Handy is perfect, but because you can make it perfect for you."_
